Revival of #9710 (Compact kernel representation of pattern-matching) (#13563)
coq/coq: dev/doc/case-repr.md

## Case representation

> Starting from Coq 8.14, the term representation of pattern-matching uses a so-called *compact form*. Compared to the previous representation, the major difference is that all type and term annotations on lambda and let abstractions that were present in branches and return clause of pattern-matchings were removed. In order to keep the ability to construct the old expanded form out of the new compact form, the case node also makes explicit data that was stealthily present in the expanded return clause, namely universe instances and parameters of the inductive type being eliminated.

Reviewer: How about breaking up this very long line into 6 lines?

Can you be more specific than "stealthily present"?  Where was it present and how was it hidden?

Author: > How about breaking up this very long line into 6 lines?

You mean 6 paragraphs? The line layout is controlled by the renderer.

> Can you be more specific than "stealthily present"? Where was it present and how was it hidden?

The code relied on having this data around, but I only realized that by designing the new representation. So it would qualify as a "soft" invariant that could sometimes be repaired on the fly by doing retyping magic with enough finger crossing. By contrast the new representation turns this into a hard, explicit invariant.

Reviewer: > You mean 6 paragraphs?

No.  The input line is several hundred characters long.  Please split it.  Look at the line numbers:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/103449483-b2c73000-4c5d-11eb-985d-35f21d0050f7.png)

### ML Representation

The case node now looks like
```
Case of
  case_info *
  Instance.t * (* universe instances of the inductive *)
  constr array * (* parameters of the inductive *)
  case_return * (* erased return clause *)
  case_invert * (* SProp inversion data *)
  constr * (* scrutinee *)
  case_branch array (* erased branches *)
```
where
```
type case_branch = Name.t binder_annot array * constr
type case_return = Name.t binder_annot array * types
```

For comparison, pre-8.14 case nodes were defined as follows.
```
Case of
  case_info *
  constr * (* annotated return clause *)
  case_invert * (* SProp inversion data *)
  constr * (* scrutinee *)
  constr array (* annotated branches *)
```

### Typing Rules and Invariants

> Disregarding the `case_info` cache and the SProp inversion the typing rules for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Disregarding the `case_info` cache and the SProp inversion, the typing rules for
```

the case node can be given as follows.

Provided
- Γ ⊢ c : Ind@{u} pms Indices
- Inductive Ind@{i} Δ : forall Θ, Type := cᵢ : forall Ξᵢ, Ind Δ Aᵢ
- Γ, Θ@{i := u}{Δ := pms} ⊢ p : Type
- Γ, Ξᵢ@{i := u}{Δ := pms} ⊢ snd brᵢ : p{Θ := Aᵢ{Δ := pms}}

Then Γ ⊢ Case (_, u, pms, ( _, p), _, c, br) : p{Θ := Indices}

In particular, this implies that Γ ⊢ pms : Δ@{i := u}. Parameters are stored in

> the same order as application.

Reviewer: as in the application?
as they are applied?

Author: Application node maybe? Most papers about type theory I've read don't use any article in front of "application" and treat it as an abstract noun, like "freedom".

The u universe instance must be a valid instance for the corresponding
inductive type, in particular their length must coincide.

The `Name.t binder_annot array` appearing both in the return clause and

> in the branches must satisfy some invariants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the branches must satisfy these invariants:
```

- For branches, it must have the same length as the corresponding Ξᵢ context
(including let-ins)
- For the return clause, it must have the same length as the context
Θ, self : Ind@{u} pms Θ (including let-ins). The last variable appears as

> the term being destructed and correspond to the variable introduced by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the term being destructed and corresponds to the variable introduced by the
```

"as" clause of the user-facing syntax.
- The relevance annotations must match with the corresponding sort of the
variable from the context.

Note that the annotated variable array is reversed w.r.t. the context,

> i.e. variables appear in the writing order of the context.

Reviewer: "in the writing order" ->
in the order they are written to the context?  ... added to the context?

Author: The problem with those phrasings is that there is no canonical order for context extension. Writing order is intended to mean "left to right as in standard practice" but this is just a convention, so even that is unclear.

> i.e. variables appear in the writing order of the context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
i.e. variables appear left to right as in standard practice.
```

Let-bindings can appear in Δ, Θ or Ξᵢ, since they are arbitrary
contexts. As a general rule, let bindings appear as binders but not as
instances. That is, they MUST appear in the variable array, but they MUST NOT
appear in the parameter array.

Example:
```
Inductive foo (X := tt) : forall (Y := X), Type := Foo : forall (Z := X), foo.

Definition case (x : foo) : unit := match x as x₀ in foo with Foo _ z => z end
```
The case node of the `case` function is represented as
```
Case (
  _,
  Instance.empty,
  [||],
  ([|(Y, Relevant); (x₀, Relevant)|], unit), (* let (Y := tt) in fun (x₀ : foo) => unit *)
  NoInvert,
  #1,
  [|
    ([|(z, Relevant)|], #1) (* let z := tt in z *)
  |]
)
```

This choice of representation for let-bindings requires access to the
environment in some cases, e.g. to compute branch reduction. There is a
fast-path for non-let-containing inductive types though, which are the vast
majority.

### Porting plugins

> There are two conversion functions from and to the expanded form:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The conversion functions from and to the expanded form are:
```

> - `[Inductive, EConstr].expand_case` that goes from the compact to the expanded
> form and cannot fail (assuming the term was well-typed)
> - `[Inductive, EConstr].contract_case` that goes the other way around and will
> raise anomalies if the expanded forms are not fully eta-expanded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `[Inductive, EConstr].expand_case` which goes from the compact to the expanded
form and cannot fail (assuming the term was well-typed)
- `[Inductive, EConstr].contract_case` which goes the other way around and will
raise anomalies if the expanded forms are not fully eta-expanded.
```

As such, it is always painless to convert to the old representation. Converting
the other way, you must ensure that all the terms you provide the
compatibility function with are fully eta-expanded, **including let-bindings**.

> Most of the time it happens so, so porting a plugin with 90% correction is
> just a matter of wrapping the plugin code with these two functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This works as expected for the common case with eta-expanded branches but may fail for plugins
that generate non-eta-expanded branches.
```

The "so, so" and "90% correction" don't make too much sense.

> As such, it is alway painless to convert to the old representation. If you go
> the other way around, you must ensure that all the terms you provide the
> compatibility function with are fully eta-expanded, **including let-bindings**.
> Most of the time it happens so, so porting a plugin with 90% correction is
> just a matter of wrapping the plugin code with the two above functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As such, it is always painless to convert to the old representation. Converting
the other way, you must ensure that all the terms you provide the
compatibility function with are fully eta-expanded, **including let-bindings**.
Most of the time it happens so, so porting a plugin with 90% correction is
just a matter of wrapping the plugin code with these two functions.
```

I don't understand "Most of the time it happens so, so porting a plugin with 90% correction".
Do you mean something like "Most of the time, this [the terms are fully eta-expanded] is the case, so 90% of the work is ..."?

Author: It's uncommon to generate non-eta expanded branches, except if your plugin does it on purpose. So it means that barring weird corner cases that will sometimes fail *at runtime*, this will work as expected.
